(pleasant music)
Hi, my name is Tom Burns.
I'm the curator of the Harvard Plate Stacks Collection.
The Harvard Plate Stacks is a historic collection
within the Center for Astrophysics.
It actually started back in the 1880s as a part
of the Harvard College Observatory,
and formed one of the largest data sets still to this day
of astronomical imagery
with over 600,000 glass plates.
With the invention of photography,
no longer did the same astronomer have to sit in front
of a telescope, put their eye against an eyepiece,
and look at the stars.
Instead, you could have a team of astronomer assistants
who could make plates - these photographic images.
Then you also needed another team to actually study
and to analyze all of the plates that were coming through,
and then to do these giant computational sets.
The fourth director of the Harvard College Observatory,
Edward Pickering, realized that he had limited funds
and the way that he leveraged the most out
of the money that he had.
He made it stretch farther by, yes, giving jobs
to women early in women getting roles in academia
and science, but particularly
because he could pay them less.
With the influx of women's colleges
and co-ed education, women were all coming
with amazing mathematics skills, scientific skills,
and then particularly there was a large,
ever expanding, group of women with astronomy backgrounds.
And this is kind of how women started
to solidify their role here at the observatory
into something that was called both here,
and elsewhere at other observatories, "computers."
So in this first era of women computers here at Harvard,
the different questions that they were trying
to answer were very broad.
Stars are different sizes, and distance and size
will make it so you actually can't figure out
if a star is brighter to us because A, it's huge
or is it just really close and dim?
Also, for centuries and thousands of years,
people had looked up in the night sky
and noticed that some stars get very bright and then dim
and change over time.
But understanding why stars were actually changing is right
where this collection starts.
And one of the most famous women,
who studied these changing stars was Henrietta Swan Leavitt,
and her discoveries were all made in this particular region
of the night sky called the Small and Large
Magellanic Clouds that is only observable
in the Southern Hemisphere.
And utilizing parallax, scientists were able
to understand that these clouds were a distance away.
At the time, we didn't know that these are actually
what we call dwarf galaxies, kind of revolving
around the Milky Way.
And inside of these clouds, Leavitt is seeing
all of these variable stars.
She writes this paper,
where she tells the world about 1,770 variable stars.
This amount of variable stars quadruples the amount
of known variable stars, crazy amount to find in that day.
And she starts to measure their tempo
or their period, the pulse of these stars.
And by doing that, you're seeing how much one
of these variable stars gets bigger or smaller on the plate.
You're using an itty-bitty "fly spanker"
and a magnifying glass.
And what the fly spanker does is it has those dots
that scale, and she's moving it over to see
how big or how small each star is.
By measuring not only the stars that are changing,
but the stars that aren't,
she is then able to figure out
how much the Cepheid variables are actually varying.
But what is that in reality?
You're measuring a fleck of pepper,
but you're measuring them
and you're calculating one point in time
to another point in time, putting them together in order
to create that sinusoidal function that creates
what we call now a light curve.
Leavitt was specifically studying these Cepheid variables.
So Cepheid variables have a perfect sinusoidal function
when you graph it out.
Cepheid variables range around days to weeks.
So something like four days to three weeks
is when it gets bright, small, bright.
She's seeing this tempo not only in numbers,
but then she'll graph it out.
And once when she makes these graphs, she then starts
to realize if these stars, all the ones
that have the same tempo, all of those
in the Small Magellanic Cloud are the same size on a plate,
which means that they're the same brightness and that's new.
So she starts realizing that there's this pattern
between this period or tempo of the stars with their size
or brightness, and that allows us to actually find
and measure the universe.
This becomes the Cepheid variable principle,
or more correctly, called the "Leavitt Law."
Leavitt gives us a ruler
to actually start measuring these distances.
If I can find these stars in the Magellanic Cloud,
but these stars exist everywhere in the universe.
They exist nearer to us.
That then allows us to find a Cepheid variable
that we can actually measure with parallax.
And that means that we can know the distance between
that Cepheid variable and the Earth
as long as you find any
of these Cepheid stars in the night sky.
Because we know the distance between Earth
and some of the closest ones,
we can actually use the inverse square law
to figure out vast distances.
So she gives us the second rung
of the cosmic distance ladder,
and with that second rung, every single one
that follows is building upon her.
And Leavitt was holding those pieces of glass
that they themselves are a record of not only our galaxy,
our solar system,
but the universe as we know it, across time.
(pleasant music)